Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Richard Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a second time by Doctor
Richard Wolf. I'm leaving a link to our first
interview, which was about socialism, communism, and Trump's second
term. In the description of this one, and today
we're going to talk about Trump's tariffs, Elon Musk
and his influence on American politics and the BRICS.
So, Doctor Wolf, welcome back to the to the
show. It's always an honor to everyone.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I'm very glad to
be here.
So, let's start with Trump's tariffs. Of course, he
has just announced uh tariffs for countries all around
the world. I mean, practically every country out there,
uh, for example, he announced 25% tariffs on Canadian
and Mexican products, 20% on products coming from the
European. Union where I live, and an additional 10%
on Chinese products, an additional 10% because it adds
to the already existing tariffs. And I've heard many
things, including from American political pundits. I've heard them
saying that this is about fair trade and not.
Exactly trade war that it is a working class
war against the financial system because uh the objective
Trump has in mind is to bring back manufacturing
jobs to the US and so on. So what
do you make of these tariffs and what will
be their consequences?
OK, um, the basic purpose of these tariffs is
to make the rest of the world pay for
the difficulties that the American economy finds itself in
at this point in its history. We, we have
been telling ourselves here in the United States, and
I'm speaking to you from New York City, where
I live and work. Uh, WE have been denying
to ourselves as a nation, the depth of the
economic problems we have. We have been denying to
ourselves that the American empire created in the 20th
century is now over and declining, as all empires
eventually do. Uh, WE are going in the same
path that the British Empire did before us and
so forth. Uh, NONE of this, however, is spoken.
11 is not allowed in this country to speak
like that. We just had a presidential election in
which neither Mr. Trump nor Mr. Biden nor Ms.
Harris ever said a word about a declining empire,
ever said a word about fundamental economic problems. And
that means this is a country that comes late
to trying to solve them because it has spent
so much of its time denying that they're there.
So, when you have to catch up, you don't
have the time to have a conversation, to work
out an arrangement, to discuss, to debate, none of
that. We are suddenly confronted with a reality that
has actually already been there. And in case people
are wondering, let me briefly tell you, the United
States lost the war in Vietnam. That was already
back in 1975. We lost the war. The government
of Vietnam became the Communist Party of North Vietnam,
who was the enemy of the United States, excuse
me, in that war. We then lost the war
in Afghanistan. The Taliban runs the Afghanistan, that was
the enemy the United States ostensibly was fighting. It
lost the war in Iraq, and it is now
losing the war in Ukraine. Any empire that keeps
losing wars on its periphery, and remember, these were
all wars between the United States and some of
the poorest countries on earth, like Afghanistan, Vietnam, and
so, and we still lost the war, and you
can dance around it all you want, but these
are signs. 12. Over the last 40 years, 50
actually, we have lived through a radical redistribution of
wealth from the bottom and the middle of our
population to the top. If you do a study,
you will see that the top 10% account for
the entire gain in wealth over half a century.
That is a trauma for any society, but in
a country that prided itself on a big middle
class, on everybody enjoying a high standard of living,
this is double the trauma, and that's why we
have Mr. Trump. Mr. Trump was the anger, the
bitterness, the, the, the rage of a Population that
had been told they were Americans, and because they
were Americans, they were entitled to the American dream
of prosperity, more for their children than for them,
more even for their grandchildren. This kind of story
has been told in America by Americans, to Americans
for a century. It's all over, and it's been
over for a while, and now suddenly it's arrived.
The anger, the bitterness has arrived, and people want
something to happen. And Mr. Biden and Ms. Harris
promised them more of the same, and they were
rejected. Mr. Trump said he would fix everything overnight,
and people went and hoped that that might be
true. In under 3 months, Mr. Trump, as the
new president has proved to them, is not true,
it's not gonna happen. But to be fair to
Mr. Trump, he has in fact acted with the
kind of enormity that the situation demands. So what
did he do? He figured out that what sells
in America politically, and this has been true for
a long time. Is any kind of argument, and
you have this in other countries, Europe, for example.
The idea is to suggest that, oh no, we
don't have terrible problems, but we are determined not
to permit foreigners, not Americans, to you know, cheat
in their dealings with us, to take away from
us, the reason we are not able to enjoy
the American dream is the fault of outsiders, others,
very dangerous, kind of thing that leads to fascism.
It's our problems are not ours. They are imposed
on us. So suddenly you see an urgent need.
Think of it, we're a country that is built
on immigration. The original people living here were genocidally
removed. And Europeans took their place, and one wave
of European immigrants after another, and then the wave
of African slaves, of course, alongside that, done by
Europeans. OK. Suddenly, we are not only no longer
accepting immigrants because our economy cannot accommodate them. We
are deporting. Somewhere between 2 and 10 million people
are scheduled undocumented immigrants to be deported from the
United States. OK, that's an extraordinary, and how are
they treated? They're dangerous. Mr. Trump refers to them
as murderers and rapists. He talks about them as
invading the country. Look at the language. These are
terrible evil people. Now, let me be a professional
economist with you for a moment. This is a
country of 330 million people. Undocumented immigrants, maybe 10
million, maybe 12 million. It's hard to know. But
there is no way on God's green earth that
a poor population of 10 to 12 million explains
the economic difficulties of an enormity of 330 million
Americans. It's silly, but it worked, and it showed
Mr. Trump blaming foreigners and punishing them. Gives the
impression, he hopes to the mass of people that
this is a dramatic act, and it is a
dramatic act. And the second step after expelling the
evil immigrants, and remember, when I was growing up,
I, I was born in the United States, I've
lived and worked here all my life. It used
to be told to us in the schools, in
the media, that immigrants are wonderful, immigrants are what
made America great. Immigrants came here and worked hard
and all of that. So this is a a
reversal. Everything about the current situation in America is
a reversal of ways of thinking and ways of
acting. It's a measure of how desperate this country
is. Behind all the fakery is an anxiety, a
fundamental kind of anxiety. So, Mr. Trump, seeing it
being successful to scapegoat the immigrant, Decided, why not
do this on a bigger scale, Scapegoat the whole
world. Everybody's cheating us. Americans were so stupid over
the last 40 years that everybody could take advan.
Yeah it takes quite a a a shaken population
to buy into this. So he's punishing everybody. You
are going to have to pay a tax if
you produce something in Europe, you know, a French
cheese and Italian wine, uh, uh, a Finnish telephone,
whatever comes here, you're gonna have to pay a
tax. That's all a tariff is. It's a tax
on imports. Nothing complicated about it. Many countries have
had a tariff, including the United States. The United
States had tariffs before Mr. Trump, but what he's
done is expanded because he's in a hurry, because
the problems here are very severe. And since he's
a billionaire, and since he's completely surrounded by and
controlled by the billionaires who pay for his politics,
he is not doing anything to change the distribution
of wealth and income. We have a growing population
of poor people and 800 billionaires in this country.
The gap between rich and poor, he's doing nothing
about that. And so my conclusion for you and
for the world is to understand the problem of
this country is its inequality. And what Mr. Trump
is doing, tariffs included, will not change that and
therefore will not solve the problems of this society.
And that means Mr. Trump is likely to fail.
The odds are overwhelming that he will fail. It
won't bring jobs back. None of those things will
happen. All that we're gonna see is the rest
of the world gathering together, because now the whole
world has an enemy. I cannot stress this too
much. We saw over the last 3 days, people
who have been very having a hard time getting
together. The Chinese, the Japanese, and the South Koreans
get together around how to cope with and respond
to Mr. Trump's tariffs. Europe, where you are, which
has been unable to unify and has been declining
economically because of that, may now be able to
unify out of the enmity with the United States.
You know, this is extraordinary historical shift. But the
United States is becoming isolated. It's becoming a rogue
nation. It is the nation, everybody else is organizing
their policy against. And the long term consequences of
this situation. ARE beyond what any of us can
imagine. The United States is not the center bringing
democracy to the rest of the world. The United
States is a danger. The United States is a
threat. The United States may damage your economy. Americans
are not gonna be able to afford Mercedes-Benz or
BMW cars. And the German economy, which is in
recession now, what will happen to it? And that
was the strongest economy in Europe. If I were
a European, And both my parents, you know, my
father was French and my mother German. I come
out of the European tradition. I would be very
worried. About what is going on, especially since almost
every European government is led by people who have
been eager to be subservient to the United States
for their entire careers. These are useless people to
deal with a change situation. The first thing you
need to do in Europe, with all due respect,
I'm not there now, is to get a different
group of leaders. You have a, a new set
of problems. You need people that are not dependent
on the United States, who have not made their
whole career by championing the United States. This is
a dead end. As if the conversations between Trump
and Putin weren't enough, you are now assaulted by
a much more dangerous development.
OK, but let me ask you then, would there
be any way that tariffs would work in the
way that Trump claims uh they would or they
will in the sense of, for example, when it
comes to America bringing back manufacturing jobs to the.
US and other potential positive effects like that. I
mean, is there any way that the tariffs in
general and perhaps some targeted tariffs targeting certain specific
kinds of products would help in any way or
not?
It's a very low probability. It's not 0, not
0, it's not, I'm not saying it could never
happen, but this is It is very strange to
have a policy. Let me explain. The last 10
presidents we've had. Bushes, Clinton, Obama, all of them.
Promised when they run for office, to bring manufacturing
back. Everyone promised it, none of them delivered it.
If you look at manufacturing in the United States
over the last 70 years, it's a line that
just goes down, right? So there's nothing new about
a president saying, I am going to do support
me, vote for me, I am going to bring
that, this is boring. I, it, it, people should
not believe it, you know, if a person, if,
if a president keeps promising it and they can't
deliver it, that means that there's something going on
that makes it too difficult to do. That's the
first problem. The second problem, and here let me
be a professional economist. For a corporation with a
factory, say, in Mexico, or a factory in Africa
or a factory in China, for them to move
to the United States, which is what the idea
here is, they will come back, they use the
word reshoring, bring them back to our shores. This
is an enormous decision, costs an enormous amount of
money. And takes years to accomplish. It took 30
years for American corporations starting in the 1970s to
move their production en masse out of the United
States to Canada, Mexico, Europe, China, Asia, Brazil, and
so on. It didn't happen in a year or
5 months or anything like that. So you're not
going to see a result. In any time soon,
for sure. #2. In order to make that decision,
the corporation has to believe that the tariff will
stay in place. Otherwise, you would be spending an
enormous amount of money to move into the United
States, only to have the uh tariff removed. Then
you will be sorry because the wages in China
are still lower than the United States and the
profits higher. That's why they went there. So they're
not gonna do it, you know why? Because Mr.
Trump has shown. Already, for example, with Mexico and,
and Canada, the two major trading partners of the
United States, that one day he will raise the
tariff, the next day he will drop the tariff,
then he will postpone the. The one thing worse
than a tariff is the insecurity of not knowing
whether it will persist. So these corporations, they're not
gonna rush over here. That's ridiculous. It's too expensive,
it takes too much time, and it's too uncertain.
When you put that together, Mr. Trump's plan isn't
going to work. If he comes here and he
wants manufacturing work, manufacturing work in this country has
been the the least prestigious, the least accepted. Americans
don't want factory jobs. They want office jobs. OK?
The way the manufacturing has solved that problem is
to pay uh uh factory workers better than they
pay office workers. OK, but then they're gonna come
spend a lot of money, shut the factories where
wages are low. And come here and they're going
to have to pay much higher wages, which means
they're going to be Squeezing their own profits. They're
not gonna wanna do that. And then the worst
of it, by making an enemy of the world,
here's what you're going to see. First of all,
powerful countries around the world will be retaliating. The
Chinese, for example, already did this morning. I got
up this morning, I looked at the media, and
right away, the Chinese have matched the Americans by
raising. OK. OK, we're gonna see that Europe is
gonna do something like that and so forth. So
that means the Ameri the coming back to America
means you'll have to pay higher wages than wherever
you are now. And you're gonna have a harder
time selling to the rest of the world because
they're retaliating with their tariffs, and they are angry
at you. Now let me be a politician with
you for a moment. Every country on earth has
economic problems. But now what Mr. Trump has done
for every political leadership, no matter how corrupt. They
can go to their people in Asia, Africa, Latin
America, Europe, anywhere, and they can blame the United
States. Oh, our problems are because Mr. Trump has
a tariff. Mr. Trump has a sanction. The Russian
people, for example, I pick Russia. Why? Because there
are more US sanctions against Russia than against any
other country. But of course it permits Mr. Putin.
To do what I'm telling you, all politicians will
now do. Whatever the problems Russia has, it's because
of the United States, and there's enough truth to
that argument to make it a very successful political
argument. The world is isolating the United States, turning
against the United States. The cost of that is
incalculable. There are organizations in Canada today that are
urging Canadians this summer not to do what they
have been doing for the last 100 years. Taking
a vacation with the family south into the United
States. They're so angry at what their politicians are
telling them is the damage the United States is
doing with enough truth to it. That they're reacting.
That's gonna cost us jobs, lots of them, maybe
more than ever could be recouped. Only that won't
take several years. That's already happening right now as
I speak to you. Tourism is falling off, the
numbers are already there. So these are policies which,
taken together, are an unmitigated disaster. The only defense
Mr. Trump could mount is to say, and here
he would have some truth. The Democrats operate the
other big party in this country, Republican and Democrat.
The Democrats operate as though we don't have a
problem, which is crazy. We at least face the
problem and are trying to do something big and
massive to deal with it. You know, that's why
they won the election, because they said more or
less that, and the mass of people realized it's
crazy to stay with the Democrats. They have been
unable, supposedly the party of the working class, they
haven't been able to preserve what the working class
has, let alone make it better. They The Democrats
are the slow version of what the Republicans do
more quickly, and it's for the working class, it's
all down. Last point. What most economists, conventional economists,
not critics like me, but conventional economists, what they're
saying right now, what you would find today's New
York Times or The Washington Post or any of
the major media here, they're worried about something even
more immediate, inflation. They're very worried that these tariffs
will raise the prices of many, many things in
this country. And we already have a working class
very upset about the last inflation under Biden, that
hurt the standard of living here. Another one. Half
the reason Mr. Trump was elected was anger about
the last inflation. He promised to solve that problem
like he promised everything else. If we now have
the inflation that most people expect, and we very
well may have that. If we have that, then
you're going to see a level of resistance to
Mr. Trump that is going to make the New
York, the United States headlines in every European newspaper
for a long time.
So, shifting gears a little bit here, you've already
mentioned earlier that Donald Trump has surrounded himself by
with uh several different billionaires, and that was very
clear on his inauguration day where people like Jeff
Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, and Elon Musk were there among
others. But talking specifically about Elon Musk. And what
he's been doing with these so-called Department of governmental
efficiency by targeting things like USAID targeting Social Security,
mass firing federal employees, which is very curious because
if we're talking about efficiency, at least if I'm
not mistaken, the number of federal employees in the
US has remained. More or less the same for
the past 60 years, which just means that they
have become much more efficient over time to serve,
uh, an increasing number of people. But what, what
do you make of, uh, Elon Musk and his
influence on American politics and perhaps the curse of
billionaires in the US?
Well, Mr. Musk, you know, would be an obscure
character if he weren't, you know, at the right
place at the right time, you know, I, I
am a person who feels that history makes the
person not the other way around, and he's been
made by uh a particular act that he undertook.
Uh, YOU know, I don't want to take that
away from him. He came up with the electric
car, uh, at a time when the level of
pollution was so extreme, and if you remember, if
you know your ecology a little bit, the largest
single source of air pollution is the automobile. The
automobile is a crazy institution. Uh, I, I will
speak only now about the American situation. I don't
know, it could be a little different in the
rest of the world, although I don't think so.
I have had an automobile all my life. I'm
an American. You have to have it. It the
way our society is organized with the suburbs, which
most, most people don't live in the city and
they don't live in the country. They live in
the suburb around the city and In order to
move around, you have to have a car. There
is no public transportation. If you're lucky, there's public
transportation into the city and back out to the
suburb, but inside the suburbs where most people live,
you have to have an automobile. What does the
automobile do? It sits in the garage, or it
sits in the driveway, or it sits on the
street most of the time, all night and much
of the day. It it is a terribly inefficient
way to move people. That's why in urban areas
where it becomes even more crazy, We have subways
and buses and all the other logical ways which
are called mass transit here. But we tolerated it
until the air was starting to kill too many
people with lung cancer and emphysema and asthma, and
all the other consequences of air pollution. So something
had to be done. Logically, if efficiency mattered, you
would go from the private gas burning car to
mass transit. Street railway, underground railway, uh, buses, vans,
all of those things, cause that would be saving
on gas, saving on injury, saving on materials. I
mean, it would be cheaper, better in every way
except For the automobile company, because they wouldn't have
a mass market. Mr. Musk's achievement was to salvage
the private car while addressing the pollution issue, tada,
an automobile run on a battery, not burning oil
and gas, but still the individual car. Historically, that's
not an advance at all. An advance is mass
public quality transportation, like the railroads in Europe, for
example, and the rail system much better than the
United States system or the Japanese, which is better,
or the Chinese, which is best of all. These
things. Is it the, so he came up with
a way for automobile companies to be to remain
profitable, despite having polluted everybody, despite having killed huge
numbers of people. Remember the scandal a few years
ago. So when Volkswagen got caught cheating on the
emissions test with their device, you know, unbelievable behavior,
but he saved them, Mr. Trump, uh, Mr. Musk
did. He gave them the electric car. OK, and
that made him very rich because he was the
first one. Tesla, which is now, by the way,
going right into the toilet because it is no
longer the best car. Uh, THE best car is
made by a Chinese company called the BYD stands
for Build Your Dream. It's a company in China.
It now makes the best electric vehicles at the
lowest price. The tariff in the United States by
Mr. Biden, by the way, not by Mr. Trump.
The tariff in the United States against BYD is
100%. If you buy a BYD car in the
United States, you pay, say, $30,000 to get the
car, and then you have to give another $30,000
100% to Washington as a tax, the tariff. So
nobody has it. In Europe, you see BYD cars.
In the United States, not a one, nowhere to
be seen. OK, this is all crazy stuff for
Mr. Musk's benefit. What did he do? He probably
understood that his near monopoly of electric vehicle, the
Tesla, wouldn't survive very long. Or to say the
same thing in another way, his best hope for
supporting his industry was to control the US government.
And he did that by giving officially in the
neighborhood of $300 million 300 million dollars to Mr.
Trump for the election. Crystal clear to everyone in
the United States that that's why Mr. Trump won.
He had this enormous pool, all right? What else
does Mr. Musk do? He is in charge of
what I would call Political theater. Much of what
Mr. Trump does is political theater. All of what
Mr. Musk does is political theater. It's captured in
the following uh video, which has gone viral in
the United States. Mr. Musk is seen on a
platform holding a chainsaw. And saying that's what I'm
using to clean out the government. Now let me
explain a little bit about what you hinted at
before. In the United States, the federal government employs
roughly 5 million people. Half of them are military,
the army, the navy, all of that. I'm putting
that aside. The other half is the civilian labor
force employed by the United States government, 2.5 million.
If you wanted to bring efficiency to government in
the United States, you would begin by saying, Where
are the government employees? Because government in this country
operates at 3 levels, federal, state, and local. State
governments, that's in all of our 50 states, each
one has a state government. Total civilian employees of
state government in this country, 5 million. Double the
number of civilian employees of the federal government. And
then we get to cities and towns, what's called
local or municipal government. The employees there, 15 million.
So if you put the local and the state
together, it's 20 million public employees. If you put
the federal civilian, it's 2.5, 10 to 1. If
you wanted to do efficiency, you'd go to the
local and the state, because that's the bulk of
our public employees. You didn't. He didn't because he
can't. Too much opposition, can't control it. So we
make a theater of the 2.5 million at the
federal, but I'm not done, not at all, not
even close. How do you do efficiency? Everybody, including
Mr. Musk. Has tried to get more efficiency in
his bureaucracy. All bureaucracies know that and do that.
There are many specialized firms who do efficiency analysis.
And you hire them, they come and they look
at your processes, they study your workers and how
they work and how they interact with machines, how
they interact with one another, how the hierarchy of
levels works, and then they give you a set.
OF suggestions. Here's you could fire these people, you
could rearrange this over here. That's how you do
it. But they're not doing that. They're just firing,
you know, 10s of thousands at a time. That's
not an efficiency, that's theater. That's not gonna make
it more efficient. The chaos is already here. That's
why we have hundreds of lawsuits now by workers
and agencies that have been destroyed by this behavior
and are going into court arguing it's unconstitutional, that
the law passed says you must be doing this
in the country. They can't do it because you
fired half the people who would be responsible and
And we don't know how the courts are going
to act, and we don't know how the government
is going to react when the courts act. All
of that is bringing more chaos into the United
States than we already have, but I'm still not
done. In the 1960s, we had 2.5 million people,
the civilian labor force of the government. Here we
are in 2025, we have 2.5 million people, is
the civilian labor force of the government. Meanwhile, the
population of the United States grew by 100 million
people from 1960 to now. So the same 2.5
million. ARE servicing at the federal level, a much
larger population, and as you rightly said, that's what
the word efficiency means. So these people would be
the last ones you pick to attack. There might
be efficiencies you could get there. They usually are.
But there They're the target? That's ridiculous. That's almost
insane. Ah, but it's not about efficiency, is it?
Efficiency is the language. Here's the purpose. And very
important for those who don't know America's economic dilemma.
The only major achievement of Mr. Trump's first presidency
was the tax cut he gave to corporations and
business in December of 2017, right, eight years ago.
That legislation that gave them huge tax cuts, which
by the way, they did not need because of
the redistribution of wealth they had benefited from in
the preceding 30 years. Giving them a tax cut
then was ridiculous. They didn't need it. It was
just for his political popularity, gave them a big
tax cut. Into the law, giving them the tax
cut was a provision that these tax cuts would
expire in the year 2025, 8 years into the
future. Well, that's now. His problem is Mr. Trump
political. If he doesn't do something, that law will
expire this year, and then all the tax cuts
that business and the rich got go away, and
they will be faced with a big increase as
they go back to the taxes as they were
before 2018. He doesn't want that. He wants to
pass laws this year that extend those tax cuts.
Indefinitely forever. But if he does that, And if
he has to keep spending money for all the
social programs and for all the wars, remember, we
in America bankroll the war in Ukraine. That war
would have been over many, many, many months ago
if it weren't the United States spending money. Europe
spends also, but the United States is a major
funder. A major provider of weapons, a major provider
of personnel who have been involved with the Ukrainian
army for a long time. We also fund the
Israeli activity in Gaza and in the West Bank.
So we have and we maintain an immense military.
We maintain 700 bases around the world, military base,
with an enormous military budget. About about $1 trillion
a year, huge, unimaginable amount of money. So to
keep spending money like that. You are going to
have to what? If you're gonna maintain the tax
cut for the rich. The only thing you can
do is what we've been doing, borrowing money. That's
the only way to solve the problem. And of
course, who do you borrow from? You borrow from
the rich and the corporations who, because they didn't
have to pay taxes, have the money to lend
to the government, which they do because lending to
the government is a lot better than being taxed.
Because the government gives you that money back after
a few years and pays you interest while you
wait. What rich person wouldn't rather lend to the
government than have the government tax them? We have
a government buy of and for the rich. So
here's how he's going to avoid having to borrow
as much as we have been, by savaging the
federal budget, by not just firing all those workers,
but not allowing them to spend money to support
hospitals, schools, and all the And I, I want
you to understand, the United States is now on
a trajectory. To do everything to maintain the billionaires
and the whole top 10% of our people, and
to let the other 90% sink into ever deeper
poverty. We are becoming the kind of third world
economy we used to watch on television that is
coming home, and I don't think that will survive.
I think you're going to see Social upheaval, conflict,
violence in this country in a way that will
be as astonishing as watching Mr. Trump put tariffs
on every country on earth.
So let me ask you now about another very
important member or element in our geopolitical system. Uh,
LET me ask you about the BRICS and for
people who might not be aware of it, the
acronym stands for the countries who originally created this
alliance, namely Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa,
and now other countries like Iran, Egypt, Egypt, Ethiopia,
and the UAE have joined them. Uh, HOW much
influence do the BRICS have or could have on
the world? And can they compete particularly through the
alternative institutions, payment systems, and so on and so
on that they are developing, could they compete with
the US and the West?
I think they already do. I mean, they have
an enormous potential. I won't talk about that. I,
I can't predict the future, but let me talk
simply about what they are now. Uh, THOSE 5
countries have now added to themselves another 15 more,
or maybe a bit more, 16 more. The most
recent uh few weeks ago, Indonesia, which people should
understand is one of the largest countries on this
planet. Indonesia, the most recent to join them. Uh
To give you an idea of how important they
are. Uh, THE core economy for the BRICS is
China. It is more important than the rest of
them, uh, combined. Uh, BECAUSE it has, it, it
is such an explosive story of economic growth in
the last 40 years that China is simply is
in a class by itself. But it is very
careful to build this alliance. It is particularly close
to Russia, and that has been true for some
years, but became much stronger because of the Ukraine
war for all kinds of reasons. And here's a
statistic that will make you recognize the importance. You
can make a study. It's the kind of thing
we do in economics. You can ask what, how
big is an economy, and the number we use
a statistic we look at is called the GDP
gross domestic product. It's a rough measure of the
total output of goods and services in a year,
in in a 12 month period. And we say
the GDP of a country is X gives you
a rough idea of how big it is. Well,
I'm gonna add up the GDPs of the United
States and the other members of the G7, the
group of seven. So that's the United States. Uh,
Canada. France, Britain, Germany, Italy, Britain, and Japan. That's
the G7. That is the old dominant power in
the world economy. Grouped around the United States. If
you add up their GDPs, it works out to
about 28% of total output in the world, the,
the global GDP. So, this group of seven countries
accounts for 28% of total output. Now let me
turn to China and the BRICS. The new member
of a very small club, superpowers in the world
economy. If you add up the GDP of China
and the other members of the BRICS, it's about
35% of the global GDP. In other words, the
BRICS has not only caught up. To the G7,
it has surpassed. By the way, it caught up
in the year 2020, and the gap between them
has gotten only bigger and bigger every one of
the last five years. Why? Because those countries led
by China. ARE growing faster than the G7. Let
me give you the example of the last year,
2024. I could have picked any year, but I
know the numbers. So for 2024, the fastest growing
economy in the G7. Was the United States 2.8%.
There were other members of the of the G7
that did grew less than nothing. They shrank. The
Germans had a recession. Their GDP got smaller, not
only didn't grow, but got smaller. All right, now
what was the Chinese GDP growth in 2024? 5%,
double that of the United States. India's GDP grew
at 7%, almost triple. I mean, it is extraordinary.
And that is typical. It's typical for China for
the last 25 years. It hasn't been going on
that long in India, but that's not the point.
The point is the gap is getting wider because
that is now a big part of the world
and very successful. Here's what it means just to
give you an idea. Any government in Asia, Africa,
Latin America, Eastern Europe, that's, that's trying to solve
an economic problem, sell more of what it produces,
buy better inputs for what it produces, uh, get
money, uh, to build a railroad to improve its
education system. TO provide health care for those people
used to go to London or Washington to try
to get help or investment. They still do. They
go to London, they go to Washington. But after
that, they don't go home. They go to Beijing,
New Delhi, and Sao Paulo, and they ask for
the same help. And what often happens is they
get a better deal from the Chinese than what
they can get from the Americans. So for example,
if you went to Africa now and you asked,
who's building railroads here, the answer is China, all
over Africa, China is building a railroad, cause they
will do it. They have the wealth, they have
all the technical, they can offer a better deal,
and that's happening. Step by step, project by project,
country by country, the BRICS and China are now
the economic superpower, not only equal to, but bigger
than the United States. And that takes us back
to the beginning of our conversation. The Americans watch
it, they see it, they know these numbers better
than I do, and that's where you get the
sense we have to do something enormous, massive, to
hold on to the position of the United States.
Even though they fear, and in their hearts, many
of them know they can't do it. They are
no more able to stop the historical change than
Britain was able to stop being watching its empire
fall apart and watching the United States replace them
on the global scene. Empires come and they go.
Every one of them came and went. The United
States is at the moment of when, and look,
As an American, I'm sad about it. I really
am. The United States is going through a very
hard time. And there's a rule when empires go
down. When they do, the people who are the
richest and the most powerful are in the best
position to hold on for the longest time, and
that's what they do. They hold on even as
the empire declines. And you know what that means?
That all of the suffering, all of the costs
of a declining empire are pushed onto the middle
and the poor who suffer that decline, because they're
not in the position to hold on. Mr. Trump
is the president of those holding on.
So, let me ask you then one final question.
During our conversation, you've mentioned several times the collapse
of the US Empire. And since I live in
Portugal, which is part of the European Union, I
would like to ask you a question about Europe
itself. So looking at our current position in the
geopolitical system and also taking into account that our
relationship with The US is deteriorating and even apart
from the tariffs, we also have the fact that
under Trump, at least it appears that uh the
US is no longer very willing to provide us
with uh military support if needed, and the rise
of the BRICS also. Uh, HOW do you look
at our place in the modern world and how
should we look at our future?
I think that, first of all, I think what
has happened to Europe. It is historical in the
deepest sense of that word. For much of the
last 2000 years, the events of Europe were understood,
at least by the people in Europe, as being
the world. You know, we trace our civilization back
to Greece and Rome. We think about the medieval
time, the, the whole dominance of the feudal model,
uh, in Europe, the emergence of the Renaissance and
all the artistic and creative explosion. THE transition from
feudalism to capitalism and then Europe developing so it
can control the whole world in the colonial period,
where Portugal participated for sure. As we know, that's
why people in Brazil speak, speak the Portuguese language
and so on. So Europe is, you know, and
then Europe has the two world wars. Look at
the very name. Even though it's mostly Europe, it's
a world because Europe was the now Europe is
becoming a minor secondary player. We just talked about
the G7 and the BRICS. Well, that don't include,
you know, much for Europe. Europe, in that story,
is a junior partner of the United States, completely
dominated and overwhelmed by the United States. Look at
the, the way people Starmer in Britain, uh Macron
in France, uh Mertz in Germany, uh, the woman
in Italy, Maloney. They are all people who defer
to the United States, who copy the United States,
who integrate their military, their intelligence services. My God!
All you're discovering now is you're in the terrible
situation when the the entity to which you have
linked your history, the United States. Can't afford to
work with you anymore, and thinks it has to
scavenge you. To cannibalize you. That's what they're doing.
They want to squeeze wealth out of Europe and
move it to the United States. Germany is permitting
it. Germany allowed the rupture of getting cheap energy
from Russia, which was central to its important economic
power. They gave it up. And now they're buying
expensive energy from the United States while the industrialists
there move their production to the United States. That's
I mean it's beyond words what you're doing here.
But you are faced with a terrible dilemma. You
either break with the United States and take your
chances. Or you're going to be taken down by
the United States, by the policy in in Ukraine,
by the policy of sanctioning Russia, by the policy
of selling expensive energy, and now by the policy
of tariffs on top of all of that. I
mean, can't you see the writing on the wall?
We can, I, it's crystal clear. At our highest
level, our politicians speak a disrespect for Europe that
ought to make your hair stand up. Mr. Rubio
at the State Department, Mr. Musk. Mr. Headste our
uh defense minister, Mr. Vance, the vice president, each
of them talks, use phrases like I loathe Europe.
What? What? Remember, these are people who descend from
Europeans who came to the United States, all of
them. So it's rejecting their own ancestors, rejecting the
European culture, rejecting the fact that they speak English,
which is coming from over there, and on and
on and on. You're a better Europe has to
unify. It, it has been unable to do it,
and if it doesn't do it, here's what I
will tell you. The United States will find among
the European countries, those countries who will betray Europe
to cut a special deal with the United States.
He'll sit down with every government, any government. Portugal
too, especially cause you don't have the government you
had from 2016 afterwards, you don't have the, the
left in power the way you did. So they'll
come and they will make a deal. They'll look
around, who can we buy. And they'll buy one
and give them a benefit if they betray the
others. It's classic, it's what big powers do. Look,
for a while, it was very helpful to Europe.
You didn't have to have your own military. The
US would take care of it. That allowed you
to let your rich people be rich and still
have enough money to provide social programs for your
people, much better than the American working class, Scott.
Very, but that's not available anymore. The United States
can't do that, can't afford it anymore. Not because
we don't have the wealth that we have, but
we have distributed the wealth in such a way
that the billionaires hold on to theirs. And the
rest of the working class is furious, so nobody
is ready to do anything other than rip Europe
off. That's the game. Make you go down in
order to hold on a little longer here. Meanwhile,
China and the BRICS outgrows us all.
Right. So, Doctor Wolf, we've unfortunately reached our time
limit. It's always very fascinating to talk with you.
Uh, I will be leaving links in the description
to democracy at work, your YouTube channel, your books
like Understanding Capitalism and so on, which are very
fascinating. And thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
an honor to everyone.
Thank you very much. I, I don't mean to
depress people. But you know, one of the benefits
of living in interesting times is that they are
very exciting, and there's a certain positivity and understanding
what's going on. Yes. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhnt Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary Galman
Samov Zallidrianei Poultonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall
Edin Bronner. Douglas Fry, Franca Bortolotti, Gabrielon Corteseus Slelisky,
Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Wieman,
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgarneau, Luke Lovay Georgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, the Acosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aart, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.